---
title: "Mathematics-ing in public: A New Focus for Etcetera"
date: "2026-06-17"
slug: "mathematics-ing-in-public"
tags:
  - Math
  - Updates
excerpt: >
     The focus of Etcetera is officially shifting. Moving away from pure philosophy, this space is transforming into an open notebook for fellow math hobbyists and thinkers as we seek to expand our mathematical horizons ("mathematics-ing in public" as I like to call it).
---
Last year, almost to the date, I secretly launched this blog with the goal of creating a space for what I called “in–progress thinking”. The idea was that the blog would be a place not necessarily for proving answers to the most pressing questions in science and philosophy but for asking questions, developing, and evaluating ideas, encouraging reflection. In other words, our thinking wasn't meant to be conclusive, it was meant to be in-progress. However, the guiding philosophy was set during a time when I held a keen interest in philosophy/philosophy of science, hence why topics, for example, revolved around probing the limits of intelligent design or rethinking hallucinations in large language models and the likes. Now, while I won't say I've been magically cured of the philosophy bug (can you ever be?) I have developed an unexpected but deeper passion in something else this year: Mathematics. 

I'm not going to nerd out and spend the remainder of this post explaining why Mathematics is the greatest pursuit of all time (even though it is), but I will say that I've grown deeply fond of the field, and am constantly looking for new ways to learn and explore in the area (beyond standard routes).
One thing that I've taken to doing recently is that instead of grinding through more (often repetitive) problem sets, I've actually taken to doing puzzle mathematics. I'm working through the book "The Moscow Puzzles," which, as you may know, possesses over 350 mathematical puzzles. The idea behind this is to:

(1) Get comfortable being uncomfortable in Mathematics. Speed, rather than deep reasoning, is the key skill drilled into students throughout their mathematical education. They are taught to look at a question, identify keywords, and immediately execute a learned algorithm – and unfortunately, if you can't do that instantly, you're often painted as 'not a math person.’ Additionally, this method often (albeit not purposely) prioritized getting to the answer over understanding what the question is actually asking and why the solution is what it is. However, higher level mathematics (especially, research mathematics – where I want to go into) is often the opposite. It involves sitting with a question for months, years even, and carefully and meticulously trying to understand what the question is, how I should frame the question, etc. The questions in this book, and more generally in puzzle mathematics, are designed to kind of mirror that process – even though they usually have known, creative solutions, whereas research problems may not – arriving at a solution usually involves hours and hours of thought + pursuing many different, failed paths. Therefore, by pondering and wrestling with these questions for hours, days, or even weeks (and refusing to look at the solution only until I am certain I've found it) I can train and hone this crucial skill, and grow as a Mathematician.

(2) Further develop mathematical reasoning.  As I said earlier, there's a heavy focus on algorithmic skills/procedural fluency in Mathematics (e.g. How to differentiate, integrate, simplify, etc). While I don't want to understate the importance of those skills, I can see that they are not the only skill set needed for a mathematician. Of equal importance are the cognitive and strategic skills (e.g. isomorphic thinking, inductive reasoning etc). And while over this last year, I've gotten ample training in the first set of skills, I don’t think I've given enough attention to the second set of skills. Hence why I'm doing this. The questions, at least at the start, don't require a deep mathematical toolkit. In fact, the first section states that anyone with patience and an understanding of the basic operations can get through these challenges. Instead, the problems require insight, connecting ideas, airtight logical reasoning, and creativity – all skills that I would like to improve even further.

With this being said, I'd like to share that I'm shifting the focus of the blog. It will no longer be primarily concentrated on exploring the fundamental questions of the world around us. Instead, I'll use the blog to serve as a space where fellow math hobbyists, enthusiasts, etc, and I can further hone the mathematical capabilities outlined above by diving into and analyzing these puzzle math problems. 

Important to clarify that I'm not completely abandoning the essays, I'll still do the occasional dive on the theory of AI or the philosophy of society, but the major focus, going forward, will be centered around studying and commentating on these mathematical puzzles, and growing as a Mathematician.

The blog posts won't just be the solutions to the puzzles (otherwise, why even read the blog? the solutions are widely available) they will also include my reasoning, approaches (both failed and successful), and commentary for each puzzle (e.g. the confusion, the dead ends, the small breakthroughs, what felt clever or frustrating, etc) in keeping with the "notes from the middle" ethos of the blog. I'm calling this “Mathematics-ing in public”.

I am really excited for this new (or rather updated) project, and I hope you will join me on this journey (also, feel free to submit your own math puzzles that we can explore). Be on the lookout for the first post coming soon!
