---
title: "Beyond Fine-Tuning: Asking What Intelligent Design Never Does"
date: "2025-07-15"
tags:
  - Philosophy
excerpt: >
  It is not enough to simply assert that, because the universe is complex, an 'Intelligent Designer' must be behind it. We must also ask: If such a designer exists, what follows from that? In this essay, we do just that, and explore the implications of an intelligent designer, questioning its motives, its purpose for us (or lack thereof) and even why it would create such a 'finely-tuned' universe in the first place.
---

# Introduction
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Intelligent Design Hypothesis (ID) posits that, due to the 'complexity' of natural phenomena (such as the precision of the physical constants like the charge of an electron or the intricacy of biological systems e.g. the bacterial flagellum), a higher, 'intelligent' being ‘must’ have been involved with the structure and processes of our universe (i.e. 'The Argument from Design'). While all supporters of ID agree on the existence of a designer, there exists ongoing debate about the ways in which it (The designer) designs. Early architects of ID proposed it as a counter to undirected, chance-based processes such as Darwinian evolution i.e. an ‘instead of’ to scientific explanations and theories, where the designer is presented as a panacea, providing a quick, easy resolution to every problem/question we may have about the natural world and universe. Now, due to the overwhelming support and evidence of scientific theories, this belief is/was unsustainable (though, many still attempt). As a result, more recent proponents (especially those that do not subscribe to a specific designer) have revised ID, in an attempt to reconcile it with science, contending that the processes of the natural world are NOT simply chance-based, but are the direct workings of the intelligent designer. In other words, the designer acts and creates through laws of nature. Among ID supporters, this is known as ‘Theistic Evolution’. One of the major justifications of ‘Theistic Evolution’ has been the ‘Fine-Tuning’ argument. According to Physicists, a universe that supports life is dependent on a set of fundamental characteristics that are only life-allowable at very specific values (e.g. altering the gravitational constant could prevent the aggregation of matter into stable structures like galaxies, stars, and planets). “Fine-Tuners” reckoned that this could not be purely chance-based, and had to be the result of deliberate action, viz. a designer. Despite the name, the attempt at reconciliation, and, due to the nature of science, (i.e. the need for falsifiability, empirical support, and testability) the scientific community overwhelmingly rejects ID, to the point that it is not considered a legitimate hypothesis. HOWEVER, as science does NOT deal in absolute proof, especially in regards to hypotheses and theories, this does not mean that an intelligent designer does not exist, but rather that the concept, from a scientific viewpoint, is baseless and unfounded.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Now, notice the use of “from a scientific viewpoint” in the previous sentence. This was a purposeful distinction, so as to not convey a definitive judgement (unanimous nonviability) as it relates to ID, but rather, to convey that according to a SPECIFIC framework (that is, science) ID is nonviable. And this is necessary, because in other frameworks, especially philosophical and theological ones, ID is very much still a ‘valid’ argument. In fact, despite its lack of verifiable evidence, many in those communities still accept ID as the metaphysical model of choice. For me, however, ID poses a dilemma. While I reject the form of ID that poses it as an alternative to current scientific explanation, I am unable to rule theistic evolution (the form of ID that attempts to build-off of science) out as a valid metaphysical model, mainly because I abide by Sagan’s ‘absence of evidence is not evidence of absence’ adage. However, this is also not an endorsement. Before I can accept ID as valid, there are some questions that need answering (or, at the very least, considering). These questions follow as logical continuations from if we were to accept ID as the valid ontological account. 

Note, for the purpose of this discussion, I make the following assumptions:
* A particular identity is not ascribed to the designer. (This is because, for these questions, I do not want ardent believers and devotees simply invoking their respective holy books, and deities as the answers to these questions. I am fairly knowledgeable about a lot of the religious explanations for questions about our fundamental nature, and if I found them to be sufficient, I would not be having this discussion.)   
* The designer is omniscient and omnipotent. 
* This analysis is confined to the ‘Fine-Tuning Argument’ only; versions of ID that explicitly reject scientific reasoning are excluded from consideration.

## 1. All art has a purpose, so what’s ours? 
I certainly hope that a 9-5, 3 bed 2 bath, 2 weeks PTO, and $60,000/yr isn’t all the designer has in store for us. But seriously, if a designer exists it is not enough to ‘show’ that we were designed, we must also ask why. This leaves three options:

### (A) The designer has a purpose and it involves us.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A battle Royale where all life forms across the universe battle to determine the supreme species? Or were we merely entertainment/to keep the designer occupied? Let’s say, just for discussion purposes, we could confirm that we were designed for a specific purpose. For me, this raises more complicated questions. For example, when I examine the evolutionary timeline, specifically the amount of time it took to go from the first single-celled organisms to modern-day humans (approx. 3 billion years), I can’t help but ponder “If we were created for a particular purpose by this omnipotent being, why did it take such a ‘long’ time for humans to develop? Is our purpose not urgent?” Further contemplation may see us reason that, from the perspective of the Designer, it hasn’t been a ‘long’ time for our development but merely seconds. This then prompts inquiry into the nature of our designer, specifically, his perception of time, the realm/reality in which he exists (and its differences from ours, and the influence they may have on each other).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Moreover, I have to question ITS purpose behind our purpose. Was its creation of us motivated by necessity (e.g. was he commanded by a higher-er power, or was it an inevitable fate that it had to create us?) or was it motivated by its own desires (did IT crave purpose? Was it lonely/bored? Was it lacking confidence, and wanted to establish and demonstrate superiority?)? Or maybe, it’s none of these reasons, and I am imposing, onto this intelligent designer, the nature of us humans (our thoughts, the way we process and reason, our attitudes, etcetera). And in reality, if it does have a purpose for us, that purpose wasn’t motivated by pride/ego, or demanding bosses, and, for now, (and until it PROPERLY reveals itself to us, or we fulfill our purpose) is simply beyond our comprehension and clearance level.

### (B) The designer has a purpose and it doesn't involve us, we're incidental.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Have you ever started a project (like a kombucha jar or a terrarium) neglected it for weeks, months, or even years, and upon returning later, expecting to find nothing but mere remains, you instead see that this project underwent seemingly miraculous development (a SCOBY fermented tea from the Kombucha jar or thriving ecosystem in your terrarium)? Now imagine this but on a universal scale. I ask whether something similar could have occurred with our designer. This is perhaps the most unsettling option, as it poses profound questions and implications. Is the designer limited in his control of the universe? Why have a specific purpose for the universe, then create something that is not needed for the specific purpose? This seems highly illogical, wasteful, and unnecessary. So, it is likely the case that it did not create us. Yet, here we are very much created. This implies that the designer may have had limited control with the workings of the universe. I assumed earlier that this designer was omnipotent, but this option (assuming it wasn't a choice for the designer to not exercise such control) suggests that it IS limited in its capabilities and powers. Instead of being a constructor (that has full autonomy and oversight with designing, making, building) it is merely an architect (simply, at most, outlining the plans for a specific section, and leaving the ‘rest’ up to someone, or something, else). Though, I wonder if classification as a “procrastinator” could also be an apt fit? Maybe, like our kombucha jar or terrarium, he had a specific purpose or intent, but neglected it, and our development was the consequence? In that case, the designer and I should become the best of friends, as I too grapple with severe symptoms of laziness and procrastination (not to the point of accidentally allowing the creation of an entire, new, life form within our universe, but I have cut it close).

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But, how now do we fit into its purpose? Has it refined its goals, to now account/include us? Or, despite our miraculous development, are we still not significant enough to be included in its purpose? But, more importantly, if it created the universe for a purpose, whether or not we are included in that purpose, doesn't this suggest that the purpose involves something outside our universe (maybe in a parallel universe)? I mean, why create this universe to solve a problem WITHIN this universe (especially if it may be omniscient, and should already know the end result)? This would be analogous to creating a cure for a disease that is created by the cure. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Still, suppose that the designer’s purpose for this universe is not related to another universe/external cause, and instead may actually be for an internal reason. From here, my train of thought is forced to shift, to inquire about the possibility of additional life in the universe. Short of exploration, I can see truly no reasonable purpose of creating us humans, if we are the sole beings in the universe. I joked earlier that if there is a purpose behind us, I hope it extends beyond our simple way of living, yet, if we are truly the only beings in the universe (and there existed no other universes) then this may very well be the case. Thereon, I question, why even create other planets, galaxies and stars? Are they there for decorative purposes? Or to keep us occupied? (if it is, it certainly has been a success) The only resolutions for these I can reasonably see is that our purpose may be RELATED to these additional galaxies, planets, and stars (in that, we are supposed to be exploring them). Then again, I’d push back with: 

#### I) “Why then are so many of these planets uninhabitable/unsustainable for life?” 
Too hot, too cold, no water, only water, too much radiation, too little radiation, how are we meant to explore a universe that appears to be constructed in a way that limits us from going beyond our world? 

#### II) “Why then has it made the exploration process so difficult?” 
From long distances to the need for advanced technologies, if we were designed solely for universal exploration, our designer certainly hasn't made it easy for us to achieve this goal. Couple this with the previous point regarding the uninhabitability of other planets, and this idea starts to lose most of its basis. 

#### II) “Why not just design the universe in such a way that humans are already on every/most planet(s) in the universe?” 
This seems like the clearest, simplest, most straightforward way for the designer to achieve its goals of having us explore the universe. But, maybe the designer isn’t in the game of creating reasonable solutions. Perhaps, this is supposed to be a test, of sorts, which by passing reveals something deeper about ourselves, like a ‘coming-of-age’ film. Maybe, we are supposed to begin as these feeble and timorous life forms, navigating complex challenges and issues, but through perseverance, intellect and the indomitable human spirit emerge as these triumphant, dominant conquerors of the universe. This would also resolve the first 2 questions with: (1) we’re supposed to find a way to make them habitable and (2) develop the advanced technology needed for exploring them. Even with this, I have to ask, ‘Why were we meant to be these universal explorers in the first place?’ 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Notwithstanding the foregoing, I still think that it is likely that, if this is the only possible universe the designer made then, we are not the lone conscious creatures in this universe, and our purpose is likely related to these additional sentient entities. “How?” you may ask? Either through community building or war (the only 2 true eruditions of humans) and until we are able to meet, or at least confirm the existence of, these other life forms, I, honestly, have no idea which one will entail (if it is war, however, just ensure Jon Jones leads our armies, it’s the best chance at survival, much less victory).

### (C) The designer has no purpose.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Arguably the most unlikely option, but not strictly impossible. Maybe, there isn't an external multiversal conflict only we can resolve, or an unavoidable prophecy we needed to fulfil. Maybe, it simply underwent the trouble of creating us with no objective in mind, and purely just for the sake of it. Ironically, now we have to ask ‘why?’ I struggle trying to wrap my head around this reasoning (or lack thereof). As I said earlier “all art has a purpose”, even if just for comfort, recreational purposes, contemplation, when paper is put to pen, or paint is put to canvas, there is a 'why’. Thus, my line-of-thought follows only to 2 ideas: 

#### I) We are not art. 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We are not the Mona Lisa hanging in the Louvre, or ‘Toccata and Fugue in D minor’ being played by the Vienna philharmonic, we are the sound a piano makes when an object is thrown onto the keys, the result of a cat accidentally stepping in paint, and walking across the floor. Some may argue that the sound the piano made was still an example of, the beauty of form called, music, or the cat’s pawprints are no different in elegance to Klimt’s “The Kiss”, afterall, for something to be classified as ‘art’ isn't dependent on beauty, but in how it resonates with the onlooker (and I am sure someone may find ‘Feline Form’ or “Book thrown in B flat concert” a true representation of their emotions). But, without true intent behind a piece, can we objectively define it as ‘art’? I recognize that I have shifted the discussion away from metaphysical contemplation and into an aesthetic discussion, but essentially what I was trying to get at is that if we accept a designer, but then also accept, it designs without ANY purpose, is this truly ‘design’? If an architect (or better yet, simply, a person) constructs a blueprint for a building, let’s say a house, but he was not tasked with constructing that blueprint by/for anyone or even himself, and he was not trying to create a blueprint for a house, then can we truly say that he created (a blueprint for) a ‘house’? Or is it merely a collection of lines and shapes and shading that ends up resembling a house, that we then label a ‘house’ due to its similarities? I have to support the latter. 

#### II) If the designer lacks intent, perhaps 'design' is a misnomer, unless the designer isn't separate from the universe at all. 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Let me quickly clarify: when I refer to the ‘painting’ here, I ONLY mean the universe. I am NOT asserting that humans designed humans. Additionally,, when I claim that ‘the universe created itself’, this is not a roundabout way of endorsing ‘creation through chance-based coincidences’. I'm still supposing that the universe was designed through deliberate action, but that deliberate action was not from a separate entity, but the universe itself. I know that I come across as conspiratorial here, and I apologize, but I'm simply stating that the reason, there may not be a purpose of the designer, is that there is no actual, SEPARATE ‘designer’. And I make the distinction of ‘separate’ here, because without it, the conversation is shifted away from its original intent (which was to discuss the purpose of a designer). And while it would certainly be easier to resolve this part of the discussion by concluding that 'if we do not have a purpose, then there is no designer', designer or not, my purpose isn't 'easy'. Thus, I will continue to wrestle with the more sleep-depriving idea that the designer may not be what we have initially imagined, and may actually BE the design.

## 2. Does the Designer Follow Laws, or Make Them?? 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As discussed earlier, the basis for supporting ID, specifically Theistic evolution and Fine-Tuning, was that the physical constants being set within such a narrow, life-allowable range could not be simply accidental, and had to be the outcome of intentional effort. Yet, accepting this hypothesis begs the question "Why was such precision (e.g. of the physical constants) needed in the first place? Couldn’t a (potentially) all-knowing, all-powerful designer create a universe where exactness (of the physical constants) is NOT needed for life?”. From here, 2 plausible answers follow:

### A) The designer is bounded by a set of laws for universal design
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It could be the case that these rules are stringent instructions that a designer must follow. This would explain why there is a need for a goldilocks zone, or for the CHNOPS elements to be necessary for life, or why only at the current weight of the electron can galaxies and stars form. Think: learning a concept in school, for example solving word problems in math, and your teacher showing you only one way to find the solution, and you believe (and in some cases, the teacher states) that it is the ONLY way to solve problems of this type.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But, it is also possible that these 'rules' act more as suggestions, and not strict laws that it MUST follow. Continuing from the earlier example: Some time has passed since you have left your math teacher’s class, and you come across a social media post showing you multiple different (and usually easier) ways to solve those same math problems your teacher gave you. Now, when you’re trying to find the square of a number ending in 5, instead of brute forcing the multiplication, you simply multiply the tens digit by itself plus one, then append "25" to the result. 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Nevertheless, whether these rules are strict or flexible, their existence begs a meta-question: Who authored them? It’s reasonable to assume that if one is forced to abide by a rulebook, they more than likely did not write the rulebook, and it was likely written by a person in authority over them. It is likely that this applies to our designer. This would, obviously, have fascinating follow-up questions. 


#### "Who is this higher-er power?”
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;We can’t even confirm for certain the existence of our designer, so I won’t speculate about the identity of the higher-er power? However, our speculation can't yet cease. The (possible) existence of a being in authority over our designer raises — we already know what it raises so let’s just jump straight into them. How, and why, was this being given authority over our designer? Did it create our designer? If not, then why is it a higher-er power? If it did, could it also have created other designers? If there are other designers, in what ways do they design? Do they design other universes? Or do they contribute to certain aspects of ours? The former would confirm the ‘multiverse theory’, and if we blend it with a suggestion guide (instead of a strict rulebook) that they could follow, it would explain why these other universes may have different physical laws than ours (assuming they do have different physical laws than ours). But more importantly, the existence of multiple designers, and a higher-er power suggest some type of hierarchy among the intelligent designers. And if there is a hierarchy, what governs progression? Is there even such a thing as promotion, or is each designer eternally fixed in their role? Could they retire? Die? Be replaced? And, at what level is our designer? Is it closer to the bottom? Or to the top? Is the higher-er power that is (potentially) responsible for creating our designer, the ‘Chief designer’(i.e. the CEO) or is just an immediate supervisor? If it is just an immediate supervisor, then who is at the top of the hierarchy? And most importantly, what was its goal? Multiple high-level designers over seeing multiple subordinate designers who are meticulously crafting and developing multiple universes — that couldn’t all be just for fun, right?


#### ”What was the need for the rulebook/guidelines?”
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Typically, laws are created in reaction to something that has previously occurred, and to prevent something similar from happening again. But, they are hardly ever created in prevention of something that has NEVER occurred, this is usually because rules serve as reminders of hard lessons learned, and prevention of their occurrence again. And how can you remember something or prevent it from occurring again, when it has never occurred? (As far as I am aware, there are no laws regarding relationships with extraterrestrial aliens, and that is because there is no need for them, as no one (that we’re aware of) has ever been in a relationship with extraterrestrial life). Therefore, the existence of this rulebook or guidelines would suggest that something occurred previously to warrant them (possibly, an earlier, failed universe where these laws weren’t in place).


### B) The designer simply chooses to design this way.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There also exists the less-radical (though equally possible) idea that the designer is NOT restricted by any one or any rules, he's the lone designer that simply designs how he sees fit (as most artists do) and this was the result. From our perspective, especially when we observe the other possibilities (that miniscule changes to so many important values would have drastically altered everything), it looks like precision, attention-to-detail, complexity. But, what if we examine it from its perspective? Is it still attention-to-detail and precision? We touched on this slightly before, when we discussed the potentiality of the universe not being designed. But this is slightly different. Perhaps, we're not a sophisticated design (though still a design) but due to our lack of design skills, it appears complex to us. A 1st grader looking at a 5th grader's artwork may consider it a highly technical piece, (maybe the cat ears look more realistic and he painted it orange and not purple) especially when he compares his skills. But, it is possible (and very likely) that the 3rd grader is not a highly proficient artist, and instead placed minimal effort (or none at all) in creating his piece (a freehand drawing of his cat from memory), but from the viewpoint of amateurs, it's a sight to behold. We, the first-graders, observe the universe and see sophistication, when it could very well have been a rushed, underdeveloped painting of Snickers the Cat.


## Conclusion
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In conclusion: nothing. But, that was never the goal. I never intended to, or believed that we were going to, find any easy resolutions, and we certainly did not, but, that's the cost of engaging, fairly, with an idea in philosophy (and science). However, my perspective on the issue has slightly changed since the beginning of this essay. Specifically, I cannot accept ID as a valid theory. Not only can it (or rather its supporters) not showcase any empirical evidence, but it is also a significantly underdeveloped metaphysical explanation, with large gaps, for both basic and complex questions, left unfilled. At the beginning, I stated I was indecisive in regards to ID, neither accepting or rejecting the idea, but through writing this essay, weighing these possibilities and considering these questions, I now lean more to the ‘reject’ camp. This is not an unchangeable opinion, I am still very open to its possibility. This is simply me saying: 
‘I did some initial thinking, I was originally undecided. Then after more thinking, my stance has changed, but this new stance is not conclusive’ (or to put it simply, it’s a ‘Note from the Middle of Thinking’ 😁). 
If more any evidence emerges, whether in affirmation or refutation, I will gladly reconsider, however, for now, ID is purely speculative and (at times) conspiratorial, and I, in good faith, cannot currently endorse it.


If you made it this far, nice work. If you haven’t made it this far, then how are you reading this? As I said in my introductory post, the main purpose of this blog isn’t to argue ‘my side [on anything] is correct’ (mainly because on a lot of these topics, I don’t have a ‘side’) but to engage in discussion and dialogue with others on complex topics, especially those with no consensus, to gain a different, and even better, perspective or viewpoint on the idea. So, I HIGHLY encourage you to share ANY of your thoughts on the Intelligent Design Hypothesis, and let’s get some discourse flowing. Thank you very much for reading, and I wish you all the best!


> This has been a note from the middle of thinking! 


**P.S.** Earlier, I assumed that the Designer is omniscient. While that detail may seem like a passing remark here, it’s far from trivial. If true, omniscience has serious implications for both our universe and us, especially when it comes to free will. I purposely left those discussions out of this essay, because I’ve explored them in detail elsewhere. In that paper, I argue that omniscience and free will are logically incompatible. I highly recommend giving it a read (and sharing your thoughts), as it's deeply relevant to the questions raised here. 